docs/features/LED_STATE_SYSTEM.md, before:

# LED Mirrored Progress Bar System

## Overview

The MX5-Telemetry project uses a sophisticated **mirrored progress bar** LED system that provides intuitive visual feedback for different driving conditions. The progress bar grows from both edges **inward toward the center**, creating a symmetric visual that's easy to read peripherally while driving.

The system features a **smooth color gradient** in the normal driving zone (2000-4500 RPM) that transitions through three efficiency zones: Blue (best MPG) → Green (best thermal efficiency) → Yellow (approaching high RPM).

## 🎨 The Seven States

### 🔴 Standby State (Speed = 0, RPM = 0) - NEW!
**Purpose:** Indicates system is waiting for data - CAN bus not connected OR engine off.

**Visual Pattern (Cylon Scanner Effect):**
```
Frame 1: 🔴 ● ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🔴
Frame 2: 🔴 🔴 ● ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🔴 🔴
  ...    (scanner sweeps across strip)
```
*Note: 🔴 = dim breathing red background, ● = bright white-red scanner head*

**Characteristics:**
- **Scanner effect**: Single bright dot sweeps back and forth across the strip
- **Breathing background**: Dim red glow pulses slowly (3-second cycle)
- **Scanner head**: Bright white-red (RGB: 255, 60, 30)
- **Scanner trail**: Red gradient fading 3 LEDs behind the head
- **Speed**: 50ms per position update (smooth motion)
- **Triggers when**: Speed = 0 km/h AND RPM = 0

**When It Activates:**
- System powered on but CAN bus not yet connected
- Engine is off (ignition on but not started)
- CAN communication lost (reverts to this state)
- Futuristic "standby/sleep" visual while waiting

---

### ⚪ Idle State (Speed = 0, RPM 1-1999)
**Purpose:** Visual indication of RPM while stationary - shows engine breathing/revving.

**Visual Pattern (Progressive Inward Bar):**
```
RPM 100:  ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ (1 LED per side)
RPM 500:  ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ (~3 LEDs)
RPM 1000: ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ (~5 LEDs)
RPM 1500: ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ (~7 LEDs)
RPM 2000: ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ (FULL - 10 per side)
```

**Characteristics:**
- **Progressive bar**: White LEDs grow inward from edges as RPM increases
- **Direction**: Outer edges → Center (mirrored on both sides)
- **Linear scale**: LEDs scale from 1 (RPM=1) to full (RPM=2000)
- **Gradient brightness**: Brighter at edges, dims toward center for depth effect
- **Color**: Pure white (RGB: 255, 255, 255)
- **Brightness**: 180 (out of 255) at edges, fades to ~40% at innermost lit LED
- **Triggers when**: Speed = 0 km/h AND RPM 1-1999

**When It Activates:**
- Vehicle parked/stopped at traffic light with engine running
- Engine idling (~750 RPM) or being revved while stationary
- Shows "breathing" visual feedback as RPM fluctuates at idle
- Provides instant feedback when blipping throttle while stopped

---

### 🟠 Stall Danger (Speed > 0, RPM 0-1999)
**Purpose:** Warning that engine is operating below optimal torque range while moving.

**Visual Pattern (INVERTED - more LEDs = lower RPM = more danger):**
```
RPM 0:    🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 (FULL - maximum danger!)
RPM 1000: 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 (half)
RPM 1999: 🟠 ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🟠 (minimal - almost safe)
```

**Characteristics:**
- **Progressive bar (INVERTED)**: More LEDs lit = lower RPM = more danger
- **Direction**: Bars shrink as RPM increases toward safe zone
- **Color**: Orange (RGB: 255, 80, 0)
- **Brightness**: Full intensity (255)
- **Only activates when moving**: Speed > 0 prevents false alarms at idle

**When It Activates:**
- Engine lugging (too low RPM for current gear) while driving
- Risk of stalling while moving
- Inefficient operation below torque curve

---

### 🔵🟢🟡 Normal Driving Zone (2000-4500 RPM) - Efficiency Gradient
**Purpose:** Main driving zone with smooth color gradient showing efficiency zones.

The bar grows from edges inward, with color indicating which efficiency zone you're in:

#### 🔵 Blue Zone (2000-2500 RPM) - Best MPG
**Purpose:** Optimal fuel economy for highway cruising.
```
🔵 🔵 ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🔵 🔵
```
- **Color**: Blue (RGB: 0, 100, 255)
- **Best for**: Highway cruising, maximum miles per gallon
- **Smooth transition**: Blends into green as RPM increases

#### 🟢 Green Zone (2500-4000 RPM) - Best Thermal Efficiency
**Purpose:** Optimal power-to-fuel ratio, best thermal efficiency.
```
🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢
```
- **Color**: Green (RGB: 0, 255, 0)
- **Best for**: Spirited driving, optimal engine performance
- **Smooth transition**: Blends from blue, blends into yellow

#### 🟡 Yellow Zone (4000-4500 RPM) - Approaching High RPM
**Purpose:** Nearing the shift danger zone.
```
🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡
```
- **Color**: Yellow (RGB: 255, 255, 0)
- **Indication**: Approaching high RPM, prepare to shift soon

**Visual Progression with Color Gradient:**
```
RPM 2000 (0%):   ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫   (empty)
RPM 2250 (10%):  🔵 ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🔵   (blue - best MPG)
RPM 2500 (20%):  🔵 🟢 ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🟢 🔵   (blue→green transition)
RPM 3000 (40%):  🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 ⚫ ⚫ 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢   (green - thermal efficiency)
RPM 3500 (60%):  🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢   (green - power band)
RPM 4000 (80%):  � 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 �   (green→yellow transition)
RPM 4500 (100%): 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡   (yellow - full bar)
```

**Characteristics:**
- **Smooth interpolation**: Colors blend seamlessly between zones
- **Mirrored progress bar**: Symmetric growth from both edges
- **Brightness**: Full intensity (255)
- **Non-linear mapping**: Efficiency zones get more visual emphasis (3-4-3 LED distribution)
- **Color calculation**: Linear interpolation between zone colors

---

### 🔴 Shift Danger (4501-7199 RPM)
**Purpose:** Urgent visual signal demanding immediate upshift.

**Visual Pattern (at ~6000 RPM):**
```
🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥
(✨ = rapid red/white flashing)
```

**Characteristics:**
- **Dual behavior**: 
  1. **Filled segments**: Solid red, continue growing inward
  2. **Unfilled center gap**: Flashes rapidly red/white
- **Flash speed**: Accelerates as RPM increases
  - 4501 RPM: 150ms per flash
  - 7199 RPM: 40ms per flash (extremely fast)
- **Flash colors**: Alternates between red (255,0,0) and white (255,255,255)
- **Brightness**: Maximum (255)
- **Progressive**: Gap shrinks as RPM approaches redline

**Visual Progression:**
```
4501 RPM: 🟥 🟥 ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ 🟥 🟥 (large gap)
5500 RPM: 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 (medium gap)
6500 RPM: 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 (small gap)
7000 RPM: 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 ✨ ✨ 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 (tiny gap)
```

---

### 🛑 Rev Limit (7200+ RPM)
**Purpose:** Absolute maximum - engine at fuel cut limiter.

**Visual Pattern (Full Strip):**
```
🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥
```

**Characteristics:**
- **Complete fill**: All LEDs solid red
- **No animation**: Static display for maximum urgency
- **Color**: Pure red (RGB: 255, 0, 0)
- **Brightness**: Maximum (255)

---

### ❌ Error State: Communication/Master Timeout
**Purpose:** Visual indication of communication failure - triggered by master timeout or explicit error command.

**Visual Pattern (Dual Scanner with Urgent Pulse):**
```
Frame 1: ● 🔴 🔴 ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🔴 🔴 ● 
Frame 2: 🔴 ● 🔴 🔴 ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🔴 🔴 ● 🔴
  ...    (scanners sweep inward then outward from both edges)
```
*Note: ● = bright white scanner head, 🔴 = red gradient trail, ⚫ = pulsing dim red*

**Characteristics:**
- **Dual scanner**: White scanner heads sweep inward/outward from both edges (mirrored)
- **Fast urgent pulse**: Background pulses rapidly (500ms cycle) for urgency
- **Scanner cycle**: 1.2 seconds per full in-out sweep
- **Scanner head**: Bright white flash (RGB: 255, 255, 255)
- **Scanner trail**: Red gradient fading 2 LEDs behind head
- **Background**: Pulsing dim red (~20-60 brightness)

**When It Activates:**
- Master Arduino stops sending updates for 5+ seconds
- Explicit error command (`E`) received from master
- Indicates something needs attention

---

## 📊 Complete State Summary

| State | Condition | Color | Animation | Purpose |
|-------|-----------|-------|-----------|---------|
| 🔴 Standby | Speed=0, RPM=0 | Dim Red | Scanner sweep | Waiting for CAN/engine |
| ⚪ Idle | Speed=0, RPM 1-1999 | White | Progress bar | Engine running, stationary |
| 🟠 Stall | Speed>0, RPM 0-1999 | Orange | Inverted bar | Stall warning while moving |
| 🔵 MPG | RPM 2000-2500 | Blue | Progress bar | Best fuel efficiency |
| 🟢 Thermal | RPM 2500-4000 | Green | Progress bar | Best thermal efficiency |
| 🟡 High | RPM 4000-4500 | Yellow | Progress bar | Approaching shift zone |
| 🔴 Shift | RPM 4501-7199 | Red+Flash | Flash gap | Urgent shift warning |
| 🛑 Limit | RPM 7200+ | Solid Red | Static | Rev limiter engaged |
| ❌ Error | Master timeout | Red | Dual scanner | Communication error |
---

## 📁 Implementation Files

### Arduino (C++) - Slave Controller

1. **`slave/src/LEDStates.h`**
   - LED state constants and thresholds
   - Efficiency zone definitions (blue/green/yellow ranges)
   - Color values for each state

2. **`slave/src/main.cpp`**
   - Full LED state machine implementation
   - Key functions:
     - `updateLEDDisplay()`: Main state detection and dispatch
     - `idleState()`: White pepper animation when stationary
     - `stallDangerState()`: Inverted orange bar when moving at low RPM
     - `normalDrivingState()`: Efficiency gradient (blue→green→yellow)
     - `shiftDangerState()`: Red bar with flashing center
     - `revLimitState()`: Solid red strip
     - `canErrorState()`: Red pepper animation
   - Helper functions:
     - `getInterpolatedColor()`: Linear color blending
     - `getEfficiencyColor()`: Calculate gradient color from RPM

### Configuration

1. **`lib/Config/config.h`**
   - Master Arduino configuration
   - CAN bus settings and OBD-II PIDs
   - Commented Mazda NC CAN IDs for future use

---

## 🔧 How to Modify the LED Logic

### Changing RPM Thresholds

**Edit `slave/src/LEDStates.h`:**
```cpp
// Efficiency zone thresholds
#define EFFICIENCY_BLUE_END     2500     // Blue→Green transition
#define EFFICIENCY_GREEN_END    4000     // Green→Yellow transition
#define NORMAL_RPM_MAX          4500     // Yellow→Red transition
```

### Changing Colors

**Edit `slave/src/LEDStates.h`:**
```cpp
// Efficiency zone colors
#define BLUE_COLOR_R            0
#define BLUE_COLOR_G            100
#define BLUE_COLOR_B            255

#define GREEN_COLOR_R           0
#define GREEN_COLOR_G           255
#define GREEN_COLOR_B           0

#define YELLOW_COLOR_R          255
#define YELLOW_COLOR_G          255
#define YELLOW_COLOR_B          0
```

### Building and Uploading

```powershell
# Build the slave firmware
pio run -d slave

# Upload to slave Arduino (adjust COM port as needed)
pio run -d slave --target upload --upload-port COM4
```

---

## 🔄 Workflow for Making Changes

1. **Edit Constants**
   - Modify `slave/src/LEDStates.h` for thresholds/colors
   - Modify `slave/src/main.cpp` for logic changes

2. **Build and Test**
   ```powershell
   pio run -d slave --target upload --upload-port COM4
   ```

3. **Verify Behavior**
   - Connect to vehicle or use simulator
   - Test each state transition
   - Verify color gradients are smooth

---

## 🎯 Design Philosophy

### Why These States?

1. **⚪ Idle**: Clear visual that system is working while stationary
2. **🟠 Stall Danger**: Prevents accidental engine stall while moving (manual transmission)
3. **🔵 MPG Zone**: Encourages fuel-efficient driving (2000-2500 RPM)
4. **🟢 Thermal Efficiency**: Optimal engine power-to-fuel ratio (2500-4000 RPM)
5. **🟡 High RPM**: Visual feedback approaching shift zone (4000-4500 RPM)
6. **🔴 Shift Danger**: Urgent signal to upshift before damage (4501-7199 RPM)
7. **🛑 Rev Limit**: Engine at fuel cut - immediate shift needed (7200+ RPM)

### Visual Design Principles

- **Efficiency gradient**: Smooth blue→green→yellow teaches optimal driving habits
- **Inverted stall bar**: More LEDs = more danger = lower RPM (intuitive)
- **Progressive urgency**: Calm → Active → Urgent as RPM increases
- **Color psychology**: Blue/Green (good) → Yellow (caution) → Red (danger)

### Mazda MX-5 NC Specific

These thresholds are optimized for the Mazda MX-5 NC (2006-2015):
- **2000-2500 RPM**: Best absolute MPG zone
- **2500-4000 RPM**: Best thermal efficiency (power-to-fuel ratio)
- **7200 RPM**: Factory fuel cut (rev limiter)

---

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### LEDs Not Responding

**Problem**: No LED output
**Solution**: 
- Check wiring between Slave Arduino and WS2812B strip
- Verify 5V power supply to LED strip
- Check `LED_PIN` in `slave/src/main.cpp`

### Colors Not Correct

**Problem**: Wrong colors in efficiency zone
**Solution**:
- Verify color constants in `slave/src/LEDStates.h`
- Check `getInterpolatedColor()` function
- Ensure RGB order matches your LED strip type

### State Detection Issues

**Problem**: Wrong state displayed
**Solution**:
- Check state priority order in `updateLEDDisplay()`
- Verify RPM/Speed thresholds in `LEDStates.h`
- Use Serial Monitor to debug incoming values

---

## 📊 State Comparison Table

| State | Condition | Color | Animation | Purpose |
|-------|-----------|-------|-----------|---------|
| ⚪ Idle | Speed=0, RPM≤800 | White | Pepper inward | Stationary idle |
| 🟠 Stall | Speed>0, RPM 0-1999 | Orange | Inverted bar | Stall warning |
| 🔵 MPG | RPM 2000-2500 | Blue→Green | Progress bar | Best fuel economy |
| 🟢 Thermal | RPM 2500-4000 | Green→Yellow | Progress bar | Best efficiency |
| 🟡 High | RPM 4000-4500 | Yellow | Progress bar | Approaching shift |
| 🔴 Shift | RPM 4501-7199 | Red+Flash | Flash gap | Shift urgently |
| 🛑 Limit | RPM 7200+ | Solid Red | Static | Rev limiter |
| ❌ Error | CAN Failure | Red | Pepper inward | Comms error |

---

## 🚀 Future Enhancements

Potential improvements to consider:

1. **Night Mode**: Lower brightness for nighttime driving
2. **Custom Colors**: User-configurable efficiency zone colors
3. **Multi-car Profiles**: Different thresholds for turbo vs NA engines
4. **Ambient Light Sensor**: Auto-adjust brightness based on conditions
5. **Lap Timer Integration**: Flash patterns for personal best times

---

## 📝 Version History

- **v4.0**: Efficiency Gradient System (Current)
  - ⚪ Idle: White pepper animation (Speed=0, RPM≤800)
  - 🟠 Stall Danger: Inverted orange bar (Speed>0, RPM 0-1999)
  - 🔵🟢🟡 Efficiency Gradient: Smooth blue→green→yellow (RPM 2000-4500)
  - 🔴 Shift Danger: Red bar + flashing center (RPM 4501-7199)
  - 🛑 Rev Limit: Solid red (RPM 7200+)
  - ❌ Error: Red pepper animation (CAN failure)
- **v3.0**: Seven-state mirrored progress bar system
- **v2.1**: Three-state system
- **v2.0**: Two-state system (gradient + flash)
- **v1.0**: Original single gradient implementation

---

## 📧 Support

If you encounter issues:

1. Check this documentation first
2. Review `slave/src/main.cpp` for logic
3. Verify constants in `slave/src/LEDStates.h`
4. Use Serial Monitor to debug values

---

**🌈 Drive efficiently - keep those LEDs blue and green for best MPG!**

Commit message:

Update docs for ESP32 mounting, deployment, and data flow
Clarifies that the ESP32-S3 round display is mounted in the stock oil gauge hole, updates system architecture diagrams, and expands documentation on deployment, data flow, and settings synchronization between Pi, ESP32, and Arduino. Improves hardware setup, wiring, and workflow instructions for remote and local firmware uploads. Archives legacy dual-arduino documentation and utilities.

docs/features/LED_STATE_SYSTEM.md, after:

# LED Mirrored Progress Bar System

## Architecture Context

This document describes the LED behavior on the **Arduino Nano**, which is mounted behind the gauge cluster and controls a WS2812B LED strip. The Arduino reads RPM directly from the HS-CAN bus (shared with the Raspberry Pi) for <1ms CAN→LED latency.

**Related Components:**
- Arduino Nano: LED strip controller (this document)
- Raspberry Pi 4B: Sends LED settings (brightness, thresholds) via serial
- ESP32-S3: Not involved in LED control (handles display + TPMS + G-force)

---

## Overview

The MX5-Telemetry project uses a sophisticated **mirrored progress bar** LED system that provides intuitive visual feedback for different driving conditions. The progress bar grows from both edges **inward toward the center**, creating a symmetric visual that's easy to read peripherally while driving.

The system features a **smooth color gradient** in the normal driving zone (2000-4500 RPM) that transitions through three efficiency zones: Blue (best MPG) → Green (best thermal efficiency) → Yellow (approaching high RPM).

## 🎨 The Seven States

### 🔴 Standby State (Speed = 0, RPM = 0) - NEW!
**Purpose:** Indicates system is waiting for data - CAN bus not connected OR engine off.

**Visual Pattern (Cylon Scanner Effect):**
```
Frame 1: 🔴 ● ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🔴
Frame 2: 🔴 🔴 ● ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🔴 🔴
  ...    (scanner sweeps across strip)
```
*Note: 🔴 = dim breathing red background, ● = bright white-red scanner head*

**Characteristics:**
- **Scanner effect**: Single bright dot sweeps back and forth across the strip
- **Breathing background**: Dim red glow pulses slowly (3-second cycle)
- **Scanner head**: Bright white-red (RGB: 255, 60, 30)
- **Scanner trail**: Red gradient fading 3 LEDs behind the head
- **Speed**: 50ms per position update (smooth motion)
- **Triggers when**: Speed = 0 km/h AND RPM = 0

**When It Activates:**
- System powered on but CAN bus not yet connected
- Engine is off (ignition on but not started)
- CAN communication lost (reverts to this state)
- Futuristic "standby/sleep" visual while waiting

---

### ⚪ Idle State (Speed = 0, RPM 1-1999)
**Purpose:** Visual indication of RPM while stationary - shows engine breathing/revving.

**Visual Pattern (Progressive Inward Bar):**
```
RPM 100:  ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ (1 LED per side)
RPM 500:  ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ (~3 LEDs)
RPM 1000: ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ (~5 LEDs)
RPM 1500: ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ (~7 LEDs)
RPM 2000: ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ ⚪ (FULL - 10 per side)
```

**Characteristics:**
- **Progressive bar**: White LEDs grow inward from edges as RPM increases
- **Direction**: Outer edges → Center (mirrored on both sides)
- **Linear scale**: LEDs scale from 1 (RPM=1) to full (RPM=2000)
- **Gradient brightness**: Brighter at edges, dims toward center for depth effect
- **Color**: Pure white (RGB: 255, 255, 255)
- **Brightness**: 180 (out of 255) at edges, fades to ~40% at innermost lit LED
- **Triggers when**: Speed = 0 km/h AND RPM 1-1999

**When It Activates:**
- Vehicle parked/stopped at traffic light with engine running
- Engine idling (~750 RPM) or being revved while stationary
- Shows "breathing" visual feedback as RPM fluctuates at idle
- Provides instant feedback when blipping throttle while stopped

---

### 🟠 Stall Danger (Speed > 0, RPM 0-1999)
**Purpose:** Warning that engine is operating below optimal torque range while moving.

**Visual Pattern (INVERTED - more LEDs = lower RPM = more danger):**
```
RPM 0:    🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 (FULL - maximum danger!)
RPM 1000: 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 🟠 (half)
RPM 1999: 🟠 ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🟠 (minimal - almost safe)
```

**Characteristics:**
- **Progressive bar (INVERTED)**: More LEDs lit = lower RPM = more danger
- **Direction**: Bars shrink as RPM increases toward safe zone
- **Color**: Orange (RGB: 255, 80, 0)
- **Brightness**: Full intensity (255)
- **Only activates when moving**: Speed > 0 prevents false alarms at idle

**When It Activates:**
- Engine lugging (too low RPM for current gear) while driving
- Risk of stalling while moving
- Inefficient operation below torque curve

---

### 🔵🟢🟡 Normal Driving Zone (2000-4500 RPM) - Efficiency Gradient
**Purpose:** Main driving zone with smooth color gradient showing efficiency zones.

The bar grows from edges inward, with color indicating which efficiency zone you're in:

#### 🔵 Blue Zone (2000-2500 RPM) - Best MPG
**Purpose:** Optimal fuel economy for highway cruising.
```
🔵 🔵 ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🔵 🔵
```
- **Color**: Blue (RGB: 0, 100, 255)
- **Best for**: Highway cruising, maximum miles per gallon
- **Smooth transition**: Blends into green as RPM increases

#### 🟢 Green Zone (2500-4000 RPM) - Best Thermal Efficiency
**Purpose:** Optimal power-to-fuel ratio, best thermal efficiency.
```
🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢
```
- **Color**: Green (RGB: 0, 255, 0)
- **Best for**: Spirited driving, optimal engine performance
- **Smooth transition**: Blends from blue, blends into yellow

#### 🟡 Yellow Zone (4000-4500 RPM) - Approaching High RPM
**Purpose:** Nearing the shift danger zone.
```
🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡
```
- **Color**: Yellow (RGB: 255, 255, 0)
- **Indication**: Approaching high RPM, prepare to shift soon

**Visual Progression with Color Gradient:**
```
RPM 2000 (0%):   ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫   (empty)
RPM 2250 (10%):  🔵 ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🔵   (blue - best MPG)
RPM 2500 (20%):  🔵 🟢 ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🟢 🔵   (blue→green transition)
RPM 3000 (40%):  🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 ⚫ ⚫ 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢   (green - thermal efficiency)
RPM 3500 (60%):  🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢 🟢   (green - power band)
RPM 4000 (80%):  � 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 �   (green→yellow transition)
RPM 4500 (100%): 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡 🟡   (yellow - full bar)
```

**Characteristics:**
- **Smooth interpolation**: Colors blend seamlessly between zones
- **Mirrored progress bar**: Symmetric growth from both edges
- **Brightness**: Full intensity (255)
- **Non-linear mapping**: Efficiency zones get more visual emphasis (3-4-3 LED distribution)
- **Color calculation**: Linear interpolation between zone colors

---

### 🔴 Shift Danger (4501-7199 RPM)
**Purpose:** Urgent visual signal demanding immediate upshift.

**Visual Pattern (at ~6000 RPM):**
```
🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥
(✨ = rapid red/white flashing)
```

**Characteristics:**
- **Dual behavior**: 
  1. **Filled segments**: Solid red, continue growing inward
  2. **Unfilled center gap**: Flashes rapidly red/white
- **Flash speed**: Accelerates as RPM increases
  - 4501 RPM: 150ms per flash
  - 7199 RPM: 40ms per flash (extremely fast)
- **Flash colors**: Alternates between red (255,0,0) and white (255,255,255)
- **Brightness**: Maximum (255)
- **Progressive**: Gap shrinks as RPM approaches redline

**Visual Progression:**
```
4501 RPM: 🟥 🟥 ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ 🟥 🟥 (large gap)
5500 RPM: 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 (medium gap)
6500 RPM: 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 ✨ ✨ ✨ ✨ 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 (small gap)
7000 RPM: 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 ✨ ✨ 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 (tiny gap)
```

---

### 🛑 Rev Limit (7200+ RPM)
**Purpose:** Absolute maximum - engine at fuel cut limiter.

**Visual Pattern (Full Strip):**
```
🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥 🟥
```

**Characteristics:**
- **Complete fill**: All LEDs solid red
- **No animation**: Static display for maximum urgency
- **Color**: Pure red (RGB: 255, 0, 0)
- **Brightness**: Maximum (255)

---

### ❌ Error State: Communication/Master Timeout
**Purpose:** Visual indication of communication failure - triggered by master timeout or explicit error command.

**Visual Pattern (Dual Scanner with Urgent Pulse):**
```
Frame 1: ● 🔴 🔴 ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🔴 🔴 ● 
Frame 2: 🔴 ● 🔴 🔴 ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ ⚫ 🔴 🔴 ● 🔴
  ...    (scanners sweep inward then outward from both edges)
```
*Note: ● = bright white scanner head, 🔴 = red gradient trail, ⚫ = pulsing dim red*

**Characteristics:**
- **Dual scanner**: White scanner heads sweep inward/outward from both edges (mirrored)
- **Fast urgent pulse**: Background pulses rapidly (500ms cycle) for urgency
- **Scanner cycle**: 1.2 seconds per full in-out sweep
- **Scanner head**: Bright white flash (RGB: 255, 255, 255)
- **Scanner trail**: Red gradient fading 2 LEDs behind head
- **Background**: Pulsing dim red (~20-60 brightness)

**When It Activates:**
- Master Arduino stops sending updates for 5+ seconds
- Explicit error command (`E`) received from master
- Indicates something needs attention

---

## 📊 Complete State Summary

| State | Condition | Color | Animation | Purpose |
|-------|-----------|-------|-----------|---------|
| 🔴 Standby | Speed=0, RPM=0 | Dim Red | Scanner sweep | Waiting for CAN/engine |
| ⚪ Idle | Speed=0, RPM 1-1999 | White | Progress bar | Engine running, stationary |
| 🟠 Stall | Speed>0, RPM 0-1999 | Orange | Inverted bar | Stall warning while moving |
| 🔵 MPG | RPM 2000-2500 | Blue | Progress bar | Best fuel efficiency |
| 🟢 Thermal | RPM 2500-4000 | Green | Progress bar | Best thermal efficiency |
| 🟡 High | RPM 4000-4500 | Yellow | Progress bar | Approaching shift zone |
| 🔴 Shift | RPM 4501-7199 | Red+Flash | Flash gap | Urgent shift warning |
| 🛑 Limit | RPM 7200+ | Solid Red | Static | Rev limiter engaged |
| ❌ Error | Master timeout | Red | Dual scanner | Communication error |
---

## 📁 Implementation Files

### Arduino (C++) - Slave Controller

1. **`slave/src/LEDStates.h`**
   - LED state constants and thresholds
   - Efficiency zone definitions (blue/green/yellow ranges)
   - Color values for each state

2. **`slave/src/main.cpp`**
   - Full LED state machine implementation
   - Key functions:
     - `updateLEDDisplay()`: Main state detection and dispatch
     - `idleState()`: White pepper animation when stationary
     - `stallDangerState()`: Inverted orange bar when moving at low RPM
     - `normalDrivingState()`: Efficiency gradient (blue→green→yellow)
     - `shiftDangerState()`: Red bar with flashing center
     - `revLimitState()`: Solid red strip
     - `canErrorState()`: Red pepper animation
   - Helper functions:
     - `getInterpolatedColor()`: Linear color blending
     - `getEfficiencyColor()`: Calculate gradient color from RPM

### Configuration

1. **`lib/Config/config.h`**
   - Master Arduino configuration
   - CAN bus settings and OBD-II PIDs
   - Commented Mazda NC CAN IDs for future use

---

## 🔧 How to Modify the LED Logic

### Changing RPM Thresholds

**Edit `slave/src/LEDStates.h`:**
```cpp
// Efficiency zone thresholds
#define EFFICIENCY_BLUE_END     2500     // Blue→Green transition
#define EFFICIENCY_GREEN_END    4000     // Green→Yellow transition
#define NORMAL_RPM_MAX          4500     // Yellow→Red transition
```

### Changing Colors

**Edit `slave/src/LEDStates.h`:**
```cpp
// Efficiency zone colors
#define BLUE_COLOR_R            0
#define BLUE_COLOR_G            100
#define BLUE_COLOR_B            255

#define GREEN_COLOR_R           0
#define GREEN_COLOR_G           255
#define GREEN_COLOR_B           0

#define YELLOW_COLOR_R          255
#define YELLOW_COLOR_G          255
#define YELLOW_COLOR_B          0
```

### Building and Uploading

```powershell
# Build the slave firmware
pio run -d slave

# Upload to slave Arduino (adjust COM port as needed)
pio run -d slave --target upload --upload-port COM4
```

---

## 🔄 Workflow for Making Changes

1. **Edit Constants**
   - Modify `slave/src/LEDStates.h` for thresholds/colors
   - Modify `slave/src/main.cpp` for logic changes

2. **Build and Test**
   ```powershell
   pio run -d slave --target upload --upload-port COM4
   ```

3. **Verify Behavior**
   - Connect to vehicle or use simulator
   - Test each state transition
   - Verify color gradients are smooth

---

## 🎯 Design Philosophy

### Why These States?

1. **⚪ Idle**: Clear visual that system is working while stationary
2. **🟠 Stall Danger**: Prevents accidental engine stall while moving (manual transmission)
3. **🔵 MPG Zone**: Encourages fuel-efficient driving (2000-2500 RPM)
4. **🟢 Thermal Efficiency**: Optimal engine power-to-fuel ratio (2500-4000 RPM)
5. **🟡 High RPM**: Visual feedback approaching shift zone (4000-4500 RPM)
6. **🔴 Shift Danger**: Urgent signal to upshift before damage (4501-7199 RPM)
7. **🛑 Rev Limit**: Engine at fuel cut - immediate shift needed (7200+ RPM)

### Visual Design Principles

- **Efficiency gradient**: Smooth blue→green→yellow teaches optimal driving habits
- **Inverted stall bar**: More LEDs = more danger = lower RPM (intuitive)
- **Progressive urgency**: Calm → Active → Urgent as RPM increases
- **Color psychology**: Blue/Green (good) → Yellow (caution) → Red (danger)

### Mazda MX-5 NC Specific

These thresholds are optimized for the Mazda MX-5 NC (2006-2015):
- **2000-2500 RPM**: Best absolute MPG zone
- **2500-4000 RPM**: Best thermal efficiency (power-to-fuel ratio)
- **7200 RPM**: Factory fuel cut (rev limiter)

---

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### LEDs Not Responding

**Problem**: No LED output
**Solution**: 
- Check wiring between Slave Arduino and WS2812B strip
- Verify 5V power supply to LED strip
- Check `LED_PIN` in `slave/src/main.cpp`

### Colors Not Correct

**Problem**: Wrong colors in efficiency zone
**Solution**:
- Verify color constants in `slave/src/LEDStates.h`
- Check `getInterpolatedColor()` function
- Ensure RGB order matches your LED strip type

### State Detection Issues

**Problem**: Wrong state displayed
**Solution**:
- Check state priority order in `updateLEDDisplay()`
- Verify RPM/Speed thresholds in `LEDStates.h`
- Use Serial Monitor to debug incoming values

---

## 📊 State Comparison Table

| State | Condition | Color | Animation | Purpose |
|-------|-----------|-------|-----------|---------|
| ⚪ Idle | Speed=0, RPM≤800 | White | Pepper inward | Stationary idle |
| 🟠 Stall | Speed>0, RPM 0-1999 | Orange | Inverted bar | Stall warning |
| 🔵 MPG | RPM 2000-2500 | Blue→Green | Progress bar | Best fuel economy |
| 🟢 Thermal | RPM 2500-4000 | Green→Yellow | Progress bar | Best efficiency |
| 🟡 High | RPM 4000-4500 | Yellow | Progress bar | Approaching shift |
| 🔴 Shift | RPM 4501-7199 | Red+Flash | Flash gap | Shift urgently |
| 🛑 Limit | RPM 7200+ | Solid Red | Static | Rev limiter |
| ❌ Error | CAN Failure | Red | Pepper inward | Comms error |

---

## 🚀 Future Enhancements

Potential improvements to consider:

1. **Night Mode**: Lower brightness for nighttime driving
2. **Custom Colors**: User-configurable efficiency zone colors
3. **Multi-car Profiles**: Different thresholds for turbo vs NA engines
4. **Ambient Light Sensor**: Auto-adjust brightness based on conditions
5. **Lap Timer Integration**: Flash patterns for personal best times

---

## 📝 Version History

- **v4.0**: Efficiency Gradient System (Current)
  - ⚪ Idle: White pepper animation (Speed=0, RPM≤800)
  - 🟠 Stall Danger: Inverted orange bar (Speed>0, RPM 0-1999)
  - 🔵🟢🟡 Efficiency Gradient: Smooth blue→green→yellow (RPM 2000-4500)
  - 🔴 Shift Danger: Red bar + flashing center (RPM 4501-7199)
  - 🛑 Rev Limit: Solid red (RPM 7200+)
  - ❌ Error: Red pepper animation (CAN failure)
- **v3.0**: Seven-state mirrored progress bar system
- **v2.1**: Three-state system
- **v2.0**: Two-state system (gradient + flash)
- **v1.0**: Original single gradient implementation

---

## 📧 Support

If you encounter issues:

1. Check this documentation first
2. Review `slave/src/main.cpp` for logic
3. Verify constants in `slave/src/LEDStates.h`
4. Use Serial Monitor to debug values

---

**🌈 Drive efficiently - keep those LEDs blue and green for best MPG!**
