display/README.md, before:

# ESP32-S3 Round Display Module

## Overview

This module provides a visual dashboard for the MX5 Telemetry system using the **Waveshare ESP32-S3-Touch-LCD-1.85** round touch screen display.

### Hardware: Waveshare ESP32-S3-Touch-LCD-1.85

| Component | Specification |
|-----------|---------------|
| **MCU** | ESP32-S3 (Dual-core Xtensa LX7, 240MHz) |
| **Display** | 1.85" Round IPS LCD, 360×360 pixels, ST77916 controller (QSPI) |
| **Touch** | CST816 Capacitive touch controller |
| **IMU** | QMI8658 (Accelerometer + Gyroscope) |
| **IO Expander** | TCA9554PWR |
| **Flash** | 16MB |
| **PSRAM** | 8MB (OPI) |
| **Connectivity** | WiFi, BLE, USB-C |

### I2C Device Addresses
- `0x15` - CST816 Touch Controller  
- `0x20` - TCA9554PWR IO Expander
- `0x51` - QMI8658 IMU

## Quick Start

### Build and Upload Firmware

```powershell
cd display

# Build the firmware
pio run

# Upload to device (auto-detect COM port)
pio run --target upload

# Or specify COM port manually
pio run --target upload --upload-port COM8
```

### Serial Monitor

```powershell
pio device monitor -b 115200
```

### Boot Mode (if upload fails)

1. **Hold BOOT button** on the device
2. **Press RESET button** (or reconnect USB)
3. **Release BOOT button**
4. Device is now in download mode - upload should work

## PlatformIO Configuration

This project requires **Arduino-ESP32 3.x** (based on ESP-IDF 5.1+) for the Waveshare ST77916 display driver APIs.

Key `platformio.ini` settings:
```ini
; pioarduino platform provides Arduino-ESP32 3.x with ESP-IDF 5.x APIs
platform = https://github.com/pioarduino/platform-espressif32/releases/download/53.03.10/platform-espressif32.zip
board = esp32-s3-devkitc-1
framework = arduino

; 16MB flash with OPI PSRAM
board_build.flash_size = 16MB
board_build.psram_type = opi

; USB CDC for serial output
build_flags = 
    -DARDUINO_USB_MODE=1
    -DARDUINO_USB_CDC_ON_BOOT=1
```

> **Important**: The standard `espressif32` platform uses Arduino-ESP32 2.x (ESP-IDF 4.x) which lacks the LCD APIs needed for the ST77916 driver. The `pioarduino` platform provides Arduino-ESP32 3.x with full ESP-IDF 5.x support.

# Or specify the backup file directly
.\scripts\flash_firmware.ps1 -FirmwarePath "firmware_backup\2025-12-06_10-30-00\flash_backup_full.bin"
```

#### Flash Custom Development Build
```powershell
# Build and flash in one step
pio run --target upload

# Or use the flash script
.\scripts\flash_firmware.ps1 -Development
```

#### Erase Flash (Clean Slate)
```powershell
.\scripts\flash_firmware.ps1 -EraseFlash
```

### 4. Quick Actions Menu

For an interactive menu with all common tasks:

```powershell
.\scripts\quick_actions.ps1
```

## Project Structure

```
display/
├── platformio.ini          # PlatformIO configuration
├── partitions_custom.csv   # Custom partition table
├── src/
│   └── main.cpp           # Main application code
├── lib/                   # Local libraries
├── scripts/
│   ├── backup_firmware.ps1    # Backup firmware from device
│   ├── flash_firmware.ps1     # Flash firmware to device
│   ├── compare_firmware.ps1   # Compare two firmware files
│   └── quick_actions.ps1      # Interactive menu
└── firmware_backup/       # Backed up firmware files
```

## Display Driver

The code is configured for a GC9A01-based round display with FT5x06 touch controller. Pin configuration in `main.cpp`:

| Function | Pin |
|----------|-----|
| SPI SCK  | 12  |
| SPI MOSI | 11  |
| LCD DC   | 8   |
| LCD CS   | 10  |
| LCD RST  | 14  |
| Backlight| 45  |
| Touch SDA| 4   |
| Touch SCL| 5   |
| Touch INT| 3   |

> **Note**: Adjust these pins based on your specific board variant!

## Integration with MX5 Telemetry

The display module can connect to the main telemetry system via:

1. **WiFi**: Connect to the master Arduino via ESP8266/ESP32 bridge
2. **BLE**: Bluetooth Low Energy for wireless data
3. **CAN Bus**: Direct connection to vehicle CAN (requires MCP2515 module)
4. **Serial**: UART connection to master Arduino

### Telemetry Data Display

The gauge UI shows:
- **RPM**: Color-coded arc gauge (green → yellow → red)
- **Speed**: Digital readout
- **Gear**: Current gear indicator
- **Status**: Connection status

## Development Tips

### Adjusting for Your Board

Different ESP32-S3 round display boards may have different pin configurations. To find your board's pins:

1. Check your board's documentation/schematic
2. Look for silkscreen markings on the PCB
3. Common variants:
   - Waveshare ESP32-S3-Touch-LCD-1.28
   - LilyGO T-Display-S3
   - Generic "ESP32-S3 1.85 inch Round"

### Debug Output

Enable verbose debug output in `platformio.ini`:

```ini
build_flags = 
    -DCORE_DEBUG_LEVEL=5
```

### Serial Monitor

```powershell
pio device monitor -b 115200
```

## Troubleshooting

### Device Not Detected

1. Install USB drivers:
   - CP210x: [Silicon Labs](https://www.silabs.com/developers/usb-to-uart-bridge-vcp-drivers)
   - CH340: [WCH](http://www.wch-ic.com/downloads/CH341SER_ZIP.html)

2. Try different USB cables (some are charge-only)

3. Hold BOOT button while connecting

### Upload Fails

1. Put device in download mode:
   - Hold BOOT button
   - Press RESET button
   - Release RESET, then BOOT

2. Reduce upload speed in `platformio.ini`:
   ```ini
   upload_speed = 460800
   ```

### Display Not Working

1. Check pin configuration matches your board
2. Try different SPI speeds
3. Verify power supply (some displays need 3.3V, others 5V)

## Resources

- [LovyanGFX Library](https://github.com/lovyan03/LovyanGFX)
- [LVGL Documentation](https://docs.lvgl.io/8.3/)
- [ESP32-S3 Datasheet](https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp32-s3_datasheet_en.pdf)
- [esptool Documentation](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esptool/en/latest/)

Commit message:

Update docs for ESP32 mounting, deployment, and data flow
Clarifies that the ESP32-S3 round display is mounted in the stock oil gauge hole, updates system architecture diagrams, and expands documentation on deployment, data flow, and settings synchronization between Pi, ESP32, and Arduino. Improves hardware setup, wiring, and workflow instructions for remote and local firmware uploads. Archives legacy dual-arduino documentation and utilities.

display/README.md, after:

# ESP32-S3 Round Display Module

## Overview

This module provides a visual dashboard for the MX5 Telemetry system using the **Waveshare ESP32-S3-Touch-LCD-1.85** round touch screen display.

### Installation Location

**The ESP32-S3 round display is mounted in the stock oil gauge hole.** The 1.85" form factor fits perfectly in the original gauge opening, providing a clean OEM-like appearance.

### Data Flow

- **Receives from Pi (Serial)**: All CAN telemetry data, steering wheel button events, settings sync
- **Sends to Pi (Serial)**: BLE TPMS data (4 tire sensors), G-force data (QMI8658 IMU)
- **No CAN module** - All vehicle data comes through the Pi hub

### Hardware: Waveshare ESP32-S3-Touch-LCD-1.85

| Component | Specification |
|-----------|---------------|
| **MCU** | ESP32-S3 (Dual-core Xtensa LX7, 240MHz) |
| **Display** | 1.85" Round IPS LCD, 360×360 pixels, ST77916 controller (QSPI) |
| **Touch** | CST816 Capacitive touch controller |
| **IMU** | QMI8658 (Accelerometer + Gyroscope) → G-force data sent to Pi |
| **BLE** | Built-in Bluetooth 5.0 → TPMS sensor data sent to Pi |
| **IO Expander** | TCA9554PWR |
| **Flash** | 16MB |
| **PSRAM** | 8MB (OPI) |
| **Connectivity** | WiFi, BLE, USB-C |

### I2C Device Addresses
- `0x15` - CST816 Touch Controller  
- `0x20` - TCA9554PWR IO Expander
- `0x51` - QMI8658 IMU

## Quick Start

### Build and Upload Firmware

```powershell
cd display

# Build the firmware
pio run

# Upload to device (auto-detect COM port)
pio run --target upload

# Or specify COM port manually
pio run --target upload --upload-port COM8
```

### Serial Monitor

```powershell
pio device monitor -b 115200
```

### Boot Mode (if upload fails)

1. **Hold BOOT button** on the device
2. **Press RESET button** (or reconnect USB)
3. **Release BOOT button**
4. Device is now in download mode - upload should work

## PlatformIO Configuration

This project requires **Arduino-ESP32 3.x** (based on ESP-IDF 5.1+) for the Waveshare ST77916 display driver APIs.

Key `platformio.ini` settings:
```ini
; pioarduino platform provides Arduino-ESP32 3.x with ESP-IDF 5.x APIs
platform = https://github.com/pioarduino/platform-espressif32/releases/download/53.03.10/platform-espressif32.zip
board = esp32-s3-devkitc-1
framework = arduino

; 16MB flash with OPI PSRAM
board_build.flash_size = 16MB
board_build.psram_type = opi

; USB CDC for serial output
build_flags = 
    -DARDUINO_USB_MODE=1
    -DARDUINO_USB_CDC_ON_BOOT=1
```

> **Important**: The standard `espressif32` platform uses Arduino-ESP32 2.x (ESP-IDF 4.x) which lacks the LCD APIs needed for the ST77916 driver. The `pioarduino` platform provides Arduino-ESP32 3.x with full ESP-IDF 5.x support.

# Or specify the backup file directly
.\scripts\flash_firmware.ps1 -FirmwarePath "firmware_backup\2025-12-06_10-30-00\flash_backup_full.bin"
```

#### Flash Custom Development Build
```powershell
# Build and flash in one step
pio run --target upload

# Or use the flash script
.\scripts\flash_firmware.ps1 -Development
```

#### Erase Flash (Clean Slate)
```powershell
.\scripts\flash_firmware.ps1 -EraseFlash
```

### 4. Quick Actions Menu

For an interactive menu with all common tasks:

```powershell
.\scripts\quick_actions.ps1
```

## Project Structure

```
display/
├── platformio.ini          # PlatformIO configuration
├── partitions_custom.csv   # Custom partition table
├── src/
│   └── main.cpp           # Main application code
├── lib/                   # Local libraries
├── scripts/
│   ├── backup_firmware.ps1    # Backup firmware from device
│   ├── flash_firmware.ps1     # Flash firmware to device
│   ├── compare_firmware.ps1   # Compare two firmware files
│   └── quick_actions.ps1      # Interactive menu
└── firmware_backup/       # Backed up firmware files
```

## Display Driver

The code is configured for a GC9A01-based round display with FT5x06 touch controller. Pin configuration in `main.cpp`:

| Function | Pin |
|----------|-----|
| SPI SCK  | 12  |
| SPI MOSI | 11  |
| LCD DC   | 8   |
| LCD CS   | 10  |
| LCD RST  | 14  |
| Backlight| 45  |
| Touch SDA| 4   |
| Touch SCL| 5   |
| Touch INT| 3   |

> **Note**: Adjust these pins based on your specific board variant!

## Integration with MX5 Telemetry

The display module can connect to the main telemetry system via:

1. **WiFi**: Connect to the master Arduino via ESP8266/ESP32 bridge
2. **BLE**: Bluetooth Low Energy for wireless data
3. **CAN Bus**: Direct connection to vehicle CAN (requires MCP2515 module)
4. **Serial**: UART connection to master Arduino

### Telemetry Data Display

The gauge UI shows:
- **RPM**: Color-coded arc gauge (green → yellow → red)
- **Speed**: Digital readout
- **Gear**: Current gear indicator
- **Status**: Connection status

## Development Tips

### Adjusting for Your Board

Different ESP32-S3 round display boards may have different pin configurations. To find your board's pins:

1. Check your board's documentation/schematic
2. Look for silkscreen markings on the PCB
3. Common variants:
   - Waveshare ESP32-S3-Touch-LCD-1.28
   - LilyGO T-Display-S3
   - Generic "ESP32-S3 1.85 inch Round"

### Debug Output

Enable verbose debug output in `platformio.ini`:

```ini
build_flags = 
    -DCORE_DEBUG_LEVEL=5
```

### Serial Monitor

```powershell
pio device monitor -b 115200
```

## Troubleshooting

### Device Not Detected

1. Install USB drivers:
   - CP210x: [Silicon Labs](https://www.silabs.com/developers/usb-to-uart-bridge-vcp-drivers)
   - CH340: [WCH](http://www.wch-ic.com/downloads/CH341SER_ZIP.html)

2. Try different USB cables (some are charge-only)

3. Hold BOOT button while connecting

### Upload Fails

1. Put device in download mode:
   - Hold BOOT button
   - Press RESET button
   - Release RESET, then BOOT

2. Reduce upload speed in `platformio.ini`:
   ```ini
   upload_speed = 460800
   ```

### Display Not Working

1. Check pin configuration matches your board
2. Try different SPI speeds
3. Verify power supply (some displays need 3.3V, others 5V)

## Resources

- [LovyanGFX Library](https://github.com/lovyan03/LovyanGFX)
- [LVGL Documentation](https://docs.lvgl.io/8.3/)
- [ESP32-S3 Datasheet](https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp32-s3_datasheet_en.pdf)
- [esptool Documentation](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esptool/en/latest/)
