display/WORKFLOW.md, before:

# ESP32-S3 Display Module Workflow

This guide is for users who have **two ESP32-S3 round display modules** and want to:
1. **Clone** the firmware from an existing working device (Module A)
2. **Flash** it to a new device (Module B)
3. Optionally **redevelop** the source code for customization

---

## 🎯 Workflow: Clone → (Redevelop) → Flash

### Step 1: Backup Firmware from Module A (Source)

Connect the **source module** (the one with working firmware) to your computer:

```powershell
cd display
.\scripts\backup_firmware.ps1
```

This creates a complete backup in `display/firmware_backup/<timestamp>/` containing:
- `flash_backup_full.bin` - Complete 16MB flash image
- `bootloader.bin` - Bootloader partition
- `partition_table.bin` - Partition layout
- `application.bin` - Main application
- `device_info.txt` - Chip ID and MAC address
- `flash_info.txt` - Flash manufacturer info

### Step 2: Flash Firmware to Module B (Target)

Disconnect Module A and connect **Module B** (your new/blank device):

```powershell
# Flash the backed-up firmware to Module B
.\scripts\flash_firmware.ps1
```

Select the backup you just created when prompted. That's it - Module B now has the same firmware as Module A!

### Step 3: Reverse Engineer & Redevelop the Source Code

If you want to **modify** the firmware (not just clone it), you'll need to reconstruct the source code from the binary. This is a complex process, but here's a practical approach:

#### 3.1 Analyze the Binary Structure

First, examine what's in the firmware:

```powershell
# View the partition table
python -m esptool --port COM5 read_flash 0x8000 0x1000 partition_table.bin
python -m gen_esp32part partition_table.bin

# Or use ESP-IDF's partition tool
partitiontool.py partition_table.bin
```

#### 3.2 Extract and Identify Components

```powershell
# The application binary starts at 0x10000
# Use a hex editor to look for strings
strings firmware_backup/*/application.bin > strings_dump.txt
```

Look for clues in the strings dump:
- Library names (e.g., "LovyanGFX", "LVGL", "TFT_eSPI")
- Error messages and debug prints
- WiFi SSIDs, URLs, or configuration values
- Version strings

#### 3.3 Identify the Display Driver & Libraries

Common ESP32-S3 round display libraries leave signatures:

| Library | String Signatures |
|---------|-------------------|
| LovyanGFX | `LGFX`, `Panel_GC9A01`, `lgfx::` |
| TFT_eSPI | `TFT_eSPI`, `TFT_WIDTH` |
| LVGL | `lv_`, `LVGL`, `lv_obj` |
| Arduino_GFX | `Arduino_GFX`, `GFX_` |
| Adafruit_GFX | `Adafruit_GFX` |

#### 3.4 Use Ghidra or IDA for Deeper Analysis

For serious reverse engineering:

1. **Install Ghidra** (free, from NSA): https://ghidra-sre.org/
2. **Add ESP32 support**: Install the [Xtensa processor module](https://github.com/Ebiroll/ghidra-xtensa)
3. **Load the binary**:
   - Create new project
   - Import `application.bin`
   - Select "Xtensa:LE:32:default" as processor
   - Set base address to `0x40080000` (typical ESP32-S3 app location)

4. **Analyze**:
   - Look for `app_main` or `setup`/`loop` functions
   - Identify library calls by their patterns
   - Map out the display initialization sequence

#### 3.5 Reconstruct the Source Code

Based on your analysis, rebuild `display/src/main.cpp`:

```cpp
// Start with the template in this repo
// display/src/main.cpp

// Then modify based on what you found:
// 1. Match the display driver (GC9A01, ST7789, etc.)
// 2. Match the pin configuration
// 3. Match the UI layout (LVGL widgets, colors, fonts)
// 4. Match any communication protocols (WiFi, BLE, Serial)
```

#### 3.6 Iterative Comparison

After each change, compare your build to the original:

```powershell
# Build your version
pio run -d display

# Compare binaries
.\scripts\compare_firmware.ps1
```

The comparison tool will show which memory regions differ. Focus on:
- **App partition differences** = Your code logic differs
- **NVS differences** = Configuration/calibration data (expected to differ)
- **SPIFFS/LittleFS differences** = Asset files (fonts, images)

#### 3.7 Extract Assets (Fonts, Images)

If the firmware includes custom assets:

```powershell
# Dump the SPIFFS/LittleFS partition (typically at 0x610000)
python -m esptool --port COM5 read_flash 0x610000 0x1F0000 spiffs.bin

# Mount and extract (using mkspiffs or mklittlefs)
mkspiffs -u extracted_files -b 4096 -p 256 -s 0x1F0000 spiffs.bin
```

#### 3.8 Match Compiler Settings

For near-identical binaries, match the build configuration:

```ini
; In platformio.ini, experiment with:
build_flags = 
    -Os              ; or -O2, -O3
    -DNDEBUG         ; Release mode
    -DCORE_DEBUG_LEVEL=0
```

Different optimization levels produce very different binaries even from identical source.

#### 3.9 Document What You Learn

Create a file `display/docs/REVERSE_ENGINEERING_NOTES.md` to track:
- Identified functions and their addresses
- Library versions detected
- Pin mappings discovered
- UI element descriptions
- Communication protocols found

### Step 4: Upload Modified Source Code to Module B

Once you've reconstructed or modified the source code, build and flash it:

```powershell
# Build the project
pio run -d display

# Connect Module B (target device) and upload
pio run -d display --target upload

# Monitor serial output to verify it works
pio device monitor -b 115200
```

#### Compare Your Build to the Original

To verify your source code produces similar results:

```powershell
# Backup the firmware you just uploaded
.\scripts\backup_firmware.ps1

# Compare it to the original backup
.\scripts\compare_firmware.ps1
```

If there are differences, review the analysis report and iterate on your source code.

---

## 🔧 Common Tasks

| Task | Command |
|------|---------|
| Backup from device | `.\scripts\backup_firmware.ps1` |
| Flash backup to device | `.\scripts\flash_firmware.ps1` |
| Build custom firmware | `pio run -d display` |
| Upload custom firmware | `pio run -d display --target upload` |
| Serial monitor | `pio device monitor -b 115200` |
| Interactive menu | `.\scripts\quick_actions.ps1` |

---

## 🔌 Connecting a Module

1. **USB Connection**
   - Use a data-capable USB cable (not charge-only)
   - Install drivers if needed (CP210x or CH340)

2. **Download Mode** (if upload fails)
   - Hold BOOT button
   - Press and release RESET
   - Release BOOT button
   - Device is now in download mode

3. **Finding the COM Port**
   - Windows: Device Manager → Ports (COM & LPT)
   - Or run: `pio device list`

---

## 🎨 Customizing the Display (For Developers)

### Pin Configuration
Edit `display/include/display_config.h` for your specific board's pinout.

### UI Customization
The main UI is built with LVGL in `display/src/main.cpp`. Modify:
- `createGaugeUI()` - Layout and widgets
- `updateGaugeColor()` - RPM color thresholds
- Display rotation and brightness

### Adding Features
- WiFi OTA updates
- BLE connectivity
- Audio alerts
- Touch gestures
- Multiple display modes

Commit message:

Revise ESP32-S3 firmware workflow guide
Clarifies the workflow steps for users with two ESP32-S3 round display modules, emphasizing redevelopment and reverse engineering when source code is unavailable. Updates step order, adds context for reverse engineering, and improves instructions for analyzing, reconstructing, and verifying firmware before flashing to a new device.

display/WORKFLOW.md, after:

# ESP32-S3 Display Module Workflow

This guide is for users who have **two ESP32-S3 round display modules** and want to:
1. **Clone** the firmware from an existing working device (Module A)
2. **Redevelop** the source code to understand and customize the firmware
3. **Flash** the rebuilt firmware to a new device (Module B)

> **Note**: If you're cloning a device, you likely don't have the original source code. This workflow helps you extract the firmware, reverse engineer it, and rebuild equivalent source code that you can then modify and maintain.

---

## 🎯 Workflow: Clone → Redevelop → Flash

### Step 1: Backup Firmware from Module A (Source)

Connect the **source module** (the one with working firmware) to your computer:

```powershell
cd display
.\scripts\backup_firmware.ps1
```

This creates a complete backup in `display/firmware_backup/<timestamp>/` containing:
- `flash_backup_full.bin` - Complete 16MB flash image
- `bootloader.bin` - Bootloader partition
- `partition_table.bin` - Partition layout
- `application.bin` - Main application
- `device_info.txt` - Chip ID and MAC address
- `flash_info.txt` - Flash manufacturer info

### Step 2: Reverse Engineer & Redevelop the Source Code

Since you're working with a binary backup and likely don't have the original source code, you'll need to reverse engineer the firmware to understand how it works, then rebuild equivalent source code that you can modify and maintain.

#### 2.1 Analyze the Binary Structure

First, examine what's in the firmware:

```powershell
# View the partition table
python -m esptool --port COM5 read_flash 0x8000 0x1000 partition_table.bin
python -m gen_esp32part partition_table.bin

# Or use ESP-IDF's partition tool
partitiontool.py partition_table.bin
```

#### 2.2 Extract and Identify Components

```powershell
# The application binary starts at 0x10000
# Use a hex editor to look for strings
strings firmware_backup/*/application.bin > strings_dump.txt
```

Look for clues in the strings dump:
- Library names (e.g., "LovyanGFX", "LVGL", "TFT_eSPI")
- Error messages and debug prints
- WiFi SSIDs, URLs, or configuration values
- Version strings

#### 2.3 Identify the Display Driver & Libraries

Common ESP32-S3 round display libraries leave signatures:

| Library | String Signatures |
|---------|-------------------|
| LovyanGFX | `LGFX`, `Panel_GC9A01`, `lgfx::` |
| TFT_eSPI | `TFT_eSPI`, `TFT_WIDTH` |
| LVGL | `lv_`, `LVGL`, `lv_obj` |
| Arduino_GFX | `Arduino_GFX`, `GFX_` |
| Adafruit_GFX | `Adafruit_GFX` |

#### 2.4 Use Ghidra or IDA for Deeper Analysis

For serious reverse engineering:

1. **Install Ghidra** (free, from NSA): https://ghidra-sre.org/
2. **Add ESP32 support**: Install the [Xtensa processor module](https://github.com/Ebiroll/ghidra-xtensa)
3. **Load the binary**:
   - Create new project
   - Import `application.bin`
   - Select "Xtensa:LE:32:default" as processor
   - Set base address to `0x40080000` (typical ESP32-S3 app location)

4. **Analyze**:
   - Look for `app_main` or `setup`/`loop` functions
   - Identify library calls by their patterns
   - Map out the display initialization sequence

#### 2.5 Reconstruct the Source Code

Based on your analysis, rebuild `display/src/main.cpp`:

```cpp
// Start with the template in this repo
// display/src/main.cpp

// Then modify based on what you found:
// 1. Match the display driver (GC9A01, ST7789, etc.)
// 2. Match the pin configuration
// 3. Match the UI layout (LVGL widgets, colors, fonts)
// 4. Match any communication protocols (WiFi, BLE, Serial)
```

#### 2.6 Iterative Comparison

After each change, compare your build to the original:

```powershell
# Build your version
pio run -d display

# Compare binaries
.\scripts\compare_firmware.ps1
```

The comparison tool will show which memory regions differ. Focus on:
- **App partition differences** = Your code logic differs
- **NVS differences** = Configuration/calibration data (expected to differ)
- **SPIFFS/LittleFS differences** = Asset files (fonts, images)

#### 2.7 Extract Assets (Fonts, Images)

If the firmware includes custom assets:

```powershell
# Dump the SPIFFS/LittleFS partition (typically at 0x610000)
python -m esptool --port COM5 read_flash 0x610000 0x1F0000 spiffs.bin

# Mount and extract (using mkspiffs or mklittlefs)
mkspiffs -u extracted_files -b 4096 -p 256 -s 0x1F0000 spiffs.bin
```

#### 2.8 Match Compiler Settings

For near-identical binaries, match the build configuration:

```ini
; In platformio.ini, experiment with:
build_flags = 
    -Os              ; or -O2, -O3
    -DNDEBUG         ; Release mode
    -DCORE_DEBUG_LEVEL=0
```

Different optimization levels produce very different binaries even from identical source.

#### 2.9 Document What You Learn

Create a file `display/docs/REVERSE_ENGINEERING_NOTES.md` to track:
- Identified functions and their addresses
- Library versions detected
- Pin mappings discovered
- UI element descriptions
- Communication protocols found

### Step 3: Flash the Rebuilt Firmware to Module B

Once you've reconstructed and customized the source code, build and flash it to your target device:

```powershell
# Connect Module B (your target device)

# Build the project
pio run -d display

# Upload to Module B
pio run -d display --target upload

# Monitor serial output to verify it works
pio device monitor -b 115200
```

#### Verify Your Build Against the Original

To confirm your source code produces equivalent functionality:

```powershell
# Backup the firmware you just uploaded
.\scripts\backup_firmware.ps1

# Compare it to the original backup
.\scripts\compare_firmware.ps1
```

If there are differences, review the analysis report and iterate on your source code.

---

## 🔧 Common Tasks

| Task | Command |
|------|---------|
| Backup from device | `.\scripts\backup_firmware.ps1` |
| Flash backup to device | `.\scripts\flash_firmware.ps1` |
| Build custom firmware | `pio run -d display` |
| Upload custom firmware | `pio run -d display --target upload` |
| Serial monitor | `pio device monitor -b 115200` |
| Interactive menu | `.\scripts\quick_actions.ps1` |

---

## 🔌 Connecting a Module

1. **USB Connection**
   - Use a data-capable USB cable (not charge-only)
   - Install drivers if needed (CP210x or CH340)

2. **Download Mode** (if upload fails)
   - Hold BOOT button
   - Press and release RESET
   - Release BOOT button
   - Device is now in download mode

3. **Finding the COM Port**
   - Windows: Device Manager → Ports (COM & LPT)
   - Or run: `pio device list`

---

## 🎨 Customizing the Display (For Developers)

### Pin Configuration
Edit `display/include/display_config.h` for your specific board's pinout.

### UI Customization
The main UI is built with LVGL in `display/src/main.cpp`. Modify:
- `createGaugeUI()` - Layout and widgets
- `updateGaugeColor()` - RPM color thresholds
- Display rotation and brightness

### Adding Features
- WiFi OTA updates
- BLE connectivity
- Audio alerts
- Touch gestures
- Multiple display modes
