docs/hardware/MASTER_SLAVE_ARCHITECTURE.md, before:

# Master + Slave Architecture

## Overview

The MX5-Telemetry system uses a **two-Arduino architecture** to eliminate SD card/LED interrupt conflicts:

### Arduino #1 - Master (Logger)
**Project:** `master/`
- CAN Bus reading (50Hz)
- GPS logging (10Hz)
- SD card data logging (5Hz)
- USB command interface
- Bit-bang serial TX on **Pin D6** → Slave RX (1200 baud)

**Flash:** ~81% | **RAM:** ~77%

### Arduino #2 - Slave (LED Controller)
**Project:** `slave/`
- WS2812B LED strip control on **Pin D5**
- SoftwareSerial RX on **Pin D2** ← Master TX (1200 baud)
- Haptic motor on **Pin D3** (optional)
- Brightness potentiometer on **Pin A6**
- No SD/GPS/CAN conflicts!

**Flash:** ~33% | **RAM:** ~46%

## Wiring

```
Master Arduino #1              Slave Arduino #2
─────────────────              ────────────────
D6 (TX bit-bang) ────────────→ D2 (SoftwareSerial RX)
GND ──────────────────────────→ GND
5V ←──── Buck Converter ────→ 5V
          (from 12V car)

CAN Bus (SPI)                  LED Strip (D5)
SD Card (SPI)                  Haptic Motor (D3)
GPS (D2/D3 SoftwareSerial)
```

**IMPORTANT:**
- Master uses **D6** for Slave communication (NOT D1/TX - that's USB Serial)
- Slave uses **D2** for receiving commands (SoftwareSerial RX)
- Both communicate at **1200 baud** (slow but reliable, avoids corruption from interrupts)
- **Common ground is required** between both Arduinos
- See [LED Timing and Performance](../features/LED_TIMING_AND_PERFORMANCE.md) for why 1200 baud

## Build & Upload

### 1. Flash Master (Logger)
```powershell
# From repository root
pio run -d master -t upload --upload-port COM6
```

### 2. Flash Slave (LED)
```powershell
# Swap USB cable to Slave Arduino
pio run -d slave -t upload --upload-port COM6
```

## Serial Protocol

Master sends simple commands to slave at **1200 baud** via bit-bang serial on D6.

**Message format:** `!<cmd>\n` (start marker + command + newline)

| Command | Example | Description |
|---------|---------|-------------|
| R | `!R3500\n` | Set RPM value |
| S | `!S60\n` | Set speed (km/h) |
| E | `!E\n` | Show error animation |
| W | `!W\n` | Show rainbow wave animation |
| C | `!C\n` | Clear display |
| B | `!B128\n` | Set brightness (0-255) |
| V | `!V100\n` | Trigger haptic (ms) |

**Timing:** Each message takes ~67ms at 1200 baud. Updates are sent at 10Hz (every 100ms).

## LED States

| State | Condition | Animation |
|-------|-----------|-----------|
| Idle | Speed = 0 | White pepper animation |
| Gas Efficiency | RPM 800-1500 | Static blue bars |
| Stall Danger | RPM 500-800 | Pulsing yellow |
| Normal Driving | RPM 1500-5500 | Green bar fills with RPM |
| High RPM | RPM 5500-6500 | Orange bar with flashing |
| Rev Limit | RPM > 6500 | Solid red + haptic pulse |
| Error | No CAN data | Red pepper animation |

## Benefits

✅ **No more interrupt conflicts** - Each Arduino has dedicated tasks
✅ **Faster logging** - No LED strip delays during SD writes
✅ **Better LED performance** - Dedicated CPU for smooth animations
✅ **Easier debugging** - Isolate LED issues separately
✅ **D6 avoids USB conflict** - D1 is shared with USB Serial

## Troubleshooting

### LEDs stuck on red error animation
1. Check wire from **Master D6** to **Slave D2**
2. Verify **common ground** between Arduinos
3. Confirm both are running at **1200 baud** (check config)
4. Master logs should show `CAN->LED: RPM=...` etc.

### No data received on Slave
1. Connect Slave to USB and open Serial Monitor at 115200
2. Send any USB command (e.g., `R3000`) to enable debug mode
3. When Master sends commands, you should see `RX: ...` debug output
4. If no RX output, check wiring (D6 → D2)
5. Debug mode auto-disables after 10 seconds of no USB activity

### LEDs updating slowly (3+ second delay)
See [LED Timing and Performance](../features/LED_TIMING_AND_PERFORMANCE.md) - this was fixed in Dec 2025.

### Power surge on USB
1. Disconnect LED strip 5V before plugging in USB
2. Power LEDs from external 5V supply, not USB

Commit message:

Add backup of dual Arduino setup and update docs
Added a full backup of the dual Arduino architecture under backup_dual_arduino/, including master and slave source code, shared libraries, and configuration files. Updated the main README.md to document both single and dual Arduino configurations, with detailed feature and wiring comparisons. Added new hardware wiring guides for both single and dual Arduino setups, and updated documentation to reflect the new project structure and recommendations.

docs/hardware/MASTER_SLAVE_ARCHITECTURE.md, after:

# Master + Slave Architecture

> ⚠️ **Note:** This describes the **dual Arduino** setup. For simpler RPM→LED display, see the recommended **[Single Arduino Setup](WIRING_GUIDE_SINGLE_ARDUINO.md)**.

## When to Use Dual Arduino

Choose this setup when you need:
- ✅ GPS position logging
- ✅ SD card data recording  
- ✅ USB command interface
- ✅ Full telemetry data capture

For **RPM display only**, the [Single Arduino](WIRING_GUIDE_SINGLE_ARDUINO.md) is better:
- ⚡ <1ms latency (vs ~70ms with serial)
- 🔌 Simpler wiring
- 🚫 No data corruption risk

## Overview

The MX5-Telemetry system uses a **two-Arduino architecture** to eliminate SD card/LED interrupt conflicts:

### Arduino #1 - Master (Logger)
**Project:** `master/`
- CAN Bus reading (50Hz)
- GPS logging (10Hz)
- SD card data logging (5Hz)
- USB command interface
- Bit-bang serial TX on **Pin D6** → Slave RX (1200 baud)

**Flash:** ~81% | **RAM:** ~77%

### Arduino #2 - Slave (LED Controller)
**Project:** `slave/`
- WS2812B LED strip control on **Pin D5**
- SoftwareSerial RX on **Pin D2** ← Master TX (1200 baud)
- Haptic motor on **Pin D3** (optional)
- Brightness potentiometer on **Pin A6**
- No SD/GPS/CAN conflicts!

**Flash:** ~33% | **RAM:** ~46%

## Wiring

```
Master Arduino #1              Slave Arduino #2
─────────────────              ────────────────
D6 (TX bit-bang) ────────────→ D2 (SoftwareSerial RX)
GND ──────────────────────────→ GND
5V ←──── Buck Converter ────→ 5V
          (from 12V car)

CAN Bus (SPI)                  LED Strip (D5)
SD Card (SPI)                  Haptic Motor (D3)
GPS (D2/D3 SoftwareSerial)
```

**IMPORTANT:**
- Master uses **D6** for Slave communication (NOT D1/TX - that's USB Serial)
- Slave uses **D2** for receiving commands (SoftwareSerial RX)
- Both communicate at **1200 baud** (slow but reliable, avoids corruption from interrupts)
- **Common ground is required** between both Arduinos
- See [LED Timing and Performance](../features/LED_TIMING_AND_PERFORMANCE.md) for why 1200 baud

## Build & Upload

### 1. Flash Master (Logger)
```powershell
# From repository root
pio run -d master -t upload --upload-port COM6
```

### 2. Flash Slave (LED)
```powershell
# Swap USB cable to Slave Arduino
pio run -d slave -t upload --upload-port COM6
```

## Serial Protocol

Master sends simple commands to slave at **1200 baud** via bit-bang serial on D6.

**Message format:** `!<cmd>\n` (start marker + command + newline)

| Command | Example | Description |
|---------|---------|-------------|
| R | `!R3500\n` | Set RPM value |
| S | `!S60\n` | Set speed (km/h) |
| E | `!E\n` | Show error animation |
| W | `!W\n` | Show rainbow wave animation |
| C | `!C\n` | Clear display |
| B | `!B128\n` | Set brightness (0-255) |
| V | `!V100\n` | Trigger haptic (ms) |

**Timing:** Each message takes ~67ms at 1200 baud. Updates are sent at 10Hz (every 100ms).

## LED States

| State | Condition | Animation |
|-------|-----------|-----------|
| Idle | Speed = 0 | White pepper animation |
| Gas Efficiency | RPM 800-1500 | Static blue bars |
| Stall Danger | RPM 500-800 | Pulsing yellow |
| Normal Driving | RPM 1500-5500 | Green bar fills with RPM |
| High RPM | RPM 5500-6500 | Orange bar with flashing |
| Rev Limit | RPM > 6500 | Solid red + haptic pulse |
| Error | No CAN data | Red pepper animation |

## Benefits

✅ **No more interrupt conflicts** - Each Arduino has dedicated tasks
✅ **Faster logging** - No LED strip delays during SD writes
✅ **Better LED performance** - Dedicated CPU for smooth animations
✅ **Easier debugging** - Isolate LED issues separately
✅ **D6 avoids USB conflict** - D1 is shared with USB Serial

## Troubleshooting

### LEDs stuck on red error animation
1. Check wire from **Master D6** to **Slave D2**
2. Verify **common ground** between Arduinos
3. Confirm both are running at **1200 baud** (check config)
4. Master logs should show `CAN->LED: RPM=...` etc.

### No data received on Slave
1. Connect Slave to USB and open Serial Monitor at 115200
2. Send any USB command (e.g., `R3000`) to enable debug mode
3. When Master sends commands, you should see `RX: ...` debug output
4. If no RX output, check wiring (D6 → D2)
5. Debug mode auto-disables after 10 seconds of no USB activity

### LEDs updating slowly (3+ second delay)
See [LED Timing and Performance](../features/LED_TIMING_AND_PERFORMANCE.md) - this was fixed in Dec 2025.

### Power surge on USB
1. Disconnect LED strip 5V before plugging in USB
2. Power LEDs from external 5V supply, not USB
